In this video, we're
going to see how we can
use Power Query to group data.
Very often, we need
to summarize data
without necessarily
applying a pivot operation.
For example, to help
with our budgeting,
we need to work out how much
we've spent on
training this month.
We need to take our
enrollment data
and actually add up the number of
days we've spent on training by
each department
within each branch.
We can do this using the group
by function in the Query Editor.
Let's start by clicking
into our data.
We're then going to come to
our "data tab and
from table or range.
The first thing we
need to do is select
the column or columns
that we want to group by.
Now we're going to start by just
selecting the branch column,
although we could select
department as well.
I'm then going to come
up to my home ribbon
and click "Group By".
If you have the newer version,
you will notice that it gives you
the option to do
a basic grouping,
which only allows you
to group on one field.
If you want to group
by multiple fields,
just click the advanced button
and we can now add a grouping.
In older versions, you'll
see a little plus,
which will also allow you to add
another group level.
Let's do that.
Click "The plus" or
the "Add Grouping"
and we also want
group by department.
Come down to the next section.
We want to call our new column,
add days training,
and then we need to
choose our operation,
and the selection is
quite interesting.
For one thing, we
can use a median.
Now that's not available in
traditional pivot tables.
The other one that's
very interesting,
is the count distinct.
This allows you to count
unique values only.
For example, if I
wanted to find out
how many people had
attended training
for each department,
I wouldn't want to
count Adrianna twice.
The count distinct
can help with this.
Now for our problem,
we need a sum.
We're going to select "Sum",
and the column which want
to add up, is our days.
We're now going to click "Okay",
and there's our groups data.
Hang on though,
one small problem.
We seem to have
Sidney sales twice.
Now why would that happen?
It's unlikely to be an error
with the group operation itself.
It's more likely that actually
one of these values
isn't just sales,
but sales followed by
another character.
If I click the "Little drop
down" next to department,
you'll see there're
two instances,
which tells me that although
both looks like sales to us,
clearly to the Query Editor,
one of these values is different.
Now you can check it out
in the query editor.
If I actually click onto the cell
and then come down to where to
sales and click just after,
you can see my cursor is directly
against the S. That tells me
that actually says sales.
But if I click into this value,
and click after, you can
see there's a gap there.
So, it's probably a space.
That's the most common reason,
but it could be something else.
Now how do we get rid of it?
Because we can't
just delete it here.
We can't edit the data.
But there is an option
to replace values.
We are going to have to do this,
however, before we
do the grouping.
In our plight steps,
we're going to come
back to changed type,
which was the last step
before we group the data.
Now we're going to select the
department column because
that's the only column we want
to replace the values in.
Then we're going to come
to "Replace values",
and it's going to warn us
that we inserting a step.
Now do keep an eye
on that because
you don't want to
do this by mistake.
But this is exactly
what we want to do,
so we are going to
click "Insert".
I'm looking for a space,
and I want to replace
that with nothing.
I'm just going to leave that box
empty and I'm going
to click "Okay".
Now let's check if
that has worked.
Clicking back on are grouped
rows step, it has not.
It was a good guess
but it wasn't correct.
At this stage, I'll probably go
back to the data and use some of
the data cleaning tools we looked
at in the first course
in the specialization,
to identify what
that character was.
In this scenario, however,
we have had this problem before,
and usually it's a
non breaking space.
We're going to give
that a trial instead.
Coming back to our
replaced value step,
we are going to click
on the little cog
to open up the dialogue again.
We've decided not to do a space.
I'm going to backspace, instead,
we need a non breaking space.
But how do we go about typing
in a non breaking space?
This is where the advanced
options can help us.
I'm going to click
the little white arrow
to expand those.
Then we're going to select
replace using special characters.
If you look at the
drop down list,
there are couple
of usual suspects
and the one we want is
our non breaking space.
We are going to select
that, and click "Okay".
Now if I come back
to my grouped rows,
the problem has been fixed.
Final step, let's do
the calculation to work out
how much that is
actually costing us.
It is $550 per day of training.
But unlike Excel, I can't
just come in here
and start typing.
What I can do however,
is add a column.
Coming to our "Add
column ribbon",
we're going to choose
"Custom column",
which is ideal for
doing calculation.
We're going to call a
new column June spend.
I'm just going to
abbreviate June.
Then we're going to click
in the "Formula box",
and to do our calculation,
we're going to
select days training
from the available columns.
That's a double click.
Then I'm going to
multiply by 550.
When I click "Okay",
there is my total June spend
by department within branch.
We are going to use this data
in the next video to
complete our budget.
But we don't actually need
to load it back into Excel.
Coming back to the "Home ribbon",
we're going to click the drop
down for "Close and Load",
"Close and Load to",
and we're going to create
a connection only,
and then click "Okay".
In this video, we
saw not only how
to use the group by
tool and Query Editor,
but also how to add
a custom column.
In the next video,
we're going to focus on
transforming and adding
columns in the Query Editor.